Quarkus native heap dump on OOME blog post (#1942)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2024-04-15-heapdump-oome-native.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Obtaining heap dump on OutOfMemoryError with Quarkus native'
date: 2024-04-15
tags: native heapdump oome epsilongc jol
synopsis: 'Generating and inspecting heap dumps in Quarkus native when `OutOfMemoryError` errors occur'
author: galderz
---

Starting with GraalVM for JDK 21,
native executables can run with the `-XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError` option to generate a heap dump when a `java.lang.OutOfMemoryError` is thrown.

> In this blog post we will explore how to use the flag, we will inspect what a native image heap dump looks like and how it compares with one produced by HotSpot.

Reviewer: >we will inspect what a native image heap dump looks like

Maybe there's a chance reader's  get confused by the wording here and think dumping the  Image Heap and "java heap" are different things (If they are aware that the image heap exists).

Maybe it would be good to specify that we're dumping both the read-only Image Heap as well as the native image's "Java heap". Whereas in Java mode we're just dumping the Java heap.

Reviewer: On the flip side, it could also be an opportunity to briefly inform reader's who aren't aware that there is a special segmentation to the heap in native mode.

Author: Both points sound good. I have not explored the differences in detail between the read-only and the read/write parts, but if you have feel free to propose a paragraph and add it as suggestion and we can just add it.

Reviewer: ok I've added a suggestion below!

To see this flag in action, we need to manufacture a situation where a Quarkus application runs out of memory.
One easy way to achieve this is to configure the application with a garbage collector that doesn't do any memory reclamation,
and that's exactly what the Epsilon GC does.
Once the Quarkus application is running with Epsilon GC,
apply some load and within a short space of time it will run out of memory and produce a heap dump.

Let’s start by producing a heap dump with a Quarkus native executable.
A good starting point would be a Quarkus application that simply responds to an HTTP endpoint request, e.g. the

> https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts/tree/main/getting-started-reactive[getting-started-reactive] Quarkus quickstart.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it's simpler to use https://code.quarkus.io/

E.g. I can follow this post with:

```
wget "https://code.quarkus.io/d?S=io.quarkus.platform%3A3.8&cn=code.quarkus.io" -O code.zip
unzip code.zip
cd code-with-quarkus
```

Note I explicitly set the version to Quarkus 3.8 to hopefully keep the instructions working for some time.

> Let’s start by producing a heap dump with a Quarkus native executable.
> A good starting point would be a Quarkus application that simply responds to an HTTP endpoint request, e.g. the
> https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts/tree/main/getting-started-reactive[getting-started-reactive] Quarkus quickstart.
> Once checked out,
> build a Quarkus native executable with GraalVM for JDK 21 configuring Epsilon GC.
> For Quarkus native mode, selecting the GC needs to be done at build time:
> 
> [source,bash]
> ----
> $ ./mvnw package -DskipTests -Dnative -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=--gc=epsilon
> ----
> 

Reviewer 2: I think this can be shortened a bit:

```suggestion
Let’s do this using a Quarkus application that simply responds to an HTTP endpoint request as a starting point, e.g. the
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-quickstarts/tree/main/getting-started-reactive[getting-started-reactive] Quarkus quickstart.
Once checked out,
we build a Quarkus native executable with GraalVM for JDK 21 configuring it to use Epsilon GC:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw package -DskipTests -Dnative -Dquarkus.native.additional-build-args=--gc=epsilon
----

Note: The GC selection needs to be done at build time for Quarkus native applications.

```

...
[1/8] Initializing...
 Java version: 21.0.2+13, vendor version: GraalVM CE 21.0.2+13.1
 Graal compiler: optimization level: 2, target machine: compatibility
 C compiler: gcc (redhat, x86_64, 13.2.1)
 Garbage collector: Epsilon GC (max heap size: 80% of RAM)
----

Once the build completes,
start Quarkus with `-XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError -XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError`.
The latter forces the application to shutdown when an `OutOfMemoryError` occurs rather than leave the process in an indeterminate state:

[source,bash]
----
$ getting-started-reactive-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT-runner -XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError -XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError -Xmx64m
__  ____  __  _____   ___  __ ____  ______
 --/ __ \/ / / / _ | / _ \/ //_/ / / / __/
 -/ /_/ / /_/ / __ |/ , _/ ,< / /_/ /\ \
--\___\_\____/_/ |_/_/|_/_/|_|\____/___/
2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started-reactive 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 3.9.3) started in 0.030s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Profile prod activated.
2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Installed features: [cdi, rest, smallrye-context-propagation, vertx]
----

> Next, apply some load to the HTTP endpoint exposed by the Quarkus application, for example using `wrk`:

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a bash loop with a curl command would be better as most people won't have `wrk` installed. On the other hand that's a nice way to become aware of `wrk`.

Author: Good point, `wrk` is an overkill for this. Just used to quickly firing it up :)

               1       3,236,728       3,236,728    byte[3236705]
         132,330              24       3,175,920    java.lang.String
          50,277              40       2,011,080    io.vertx.core.http.impl.headers.HeadersMultiMap$MapEntry
          10,054             184       1,849,936    io.quarkus.resteasy.reactive.server.runtime.QuarkusResteasyReactiveRequestContext
          44,852              40       1,794,080    com.oracle.svm.core.monitor.JavaMonitor
             ...             ...             ...    ...
         993,539       2,720,704      43,199,880    <other>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       1,231,054       9,438,264      58,748,168    <total>
----

The presence of SubstrateVM,
the VM that powers native images built with GraalVM,
can be clearly observed because of the instances of `com.oracle.svm.core.monitor.JavaMonitor` present in the heap dump.
What would the heap dump look like if we repeat exactly the same exercise but instead we use Quarkus JVM mode? Let’s see:

Rebuild the Quarkus app for JVM mode and run it with Epsilon GC:

[source,bash]
----

> $ java -XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError -XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+UseEpsilonGC -Xmx64m -jar quarkus-run.jar

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ mvnw package -DskipTests
$ java -XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError -XX:+ExitOnOutOfMemoryError -XX:+UnlockExperimentalVMOptions -XX:+UseEpsilonGC -Xmx64m -jar quarkus-run.jar
```

---
layout: post
title: 'Obtaining heap dump on OutOfMemoryError with Quarkus native'
date: 2024-04-15
tags: native heapdump oome epsilongc jol
synopsis: 'Generating and inspecting heap dumps in Quarkus native when `OutOfMemoryError` errors occur'
author: galderz
---

Starting with GraalVM for JDK 21,
native executables can run with the `-XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError` option to generate a heap dump when a `java.lang.OutOfMemoryError` is thrown.

> In this blog post we will explore how to use the flag, we will inspect what a native image heap dump looks like and how it compares with one produced by HotSpot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post we will explore how to use the flag, we will inspect what a Native Image heap dump looks like and how it compares with one produced by HotSpot.

The heap of Native Image executables has both read-only and read-write segments. The read-only part is referred to as the "image heap" and contains the data pre-initialized during the image build to help speed up start-up time. The read-write part is where allocations at runtime are made. Generating a Native Image heap dump will contain content from both the "image heap" and the read-write heap.   
```

---
layout: post
title: 'Obtaining heap dump on OutOfMemoryError with Quarkus native'

> date: 2024-04-15

Reviewer 3: Let's target a publication on Tuesday? We can merge tomorrow and get it published automatically on Tuesday and tweet about it on Tuesday? Friday is a slow day for blog posts.

Note that if you want it published tomorrow, I'm around!

Author: Tuesday is fine, I'll ammend it.

> tags: native heapdump oome epsilongc jol

Reviewer 3: I don't think it's a good idea to add tags that are so precise. We already have too many tags. Let's only have `native`?

synopsis: 'Generating and inspecting heap dumps in Quarkus native when `OutOfMemoryError` errors occur'
author: galderz
---

Starting with GraalVM for JDK 21,
native executables can run with the `-XX:+HeapDumpOnOutOfMemoryError` option to generate a heap dump when a `java.lang.OutOfMemoryError` is thrown.
In this blog post we will explore how to use the flag,
we will inspect what a GraalVM Native Image heap dump looks like and how it compares with one produced by HotSpot.

> The heap of GraalVM Native Image executables has both read-only and read-write segments.
> The read-only part is referred to as the "image heap" and contains the data pre-initialized during the image build to help speed up start-up time.
> The read-write part is where allocations at runtime are made.
> Therefore, generating heap dump at runtime will contain content from both the "image heap" and the read-write heap.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add this as a "note"?

```suggestion
Note: The heap of GraalVM Native Image executables has both read-only and read-write segments.
The read-only part is referred to as the "image heap" and contains the data pre-initialized during the image build to help speed up start-up time.
The read-write part is where allocations at runtime are made.
Therefore, generating heap dump at runtime will contain content from both the "image heap" and the read-write heap.
```

> Therefore, generating heap dump at runtime will contain content from both the "image heap" and the read-write heap.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, heap dumps generated at runtime will contain content from both the "image heap" and the read-write heap.
```

To see this flag in action, we need to manufacture a situation where a Quarkus application runs out of memory.
One easy way to achieve this is to configure the application with a garbage collector that doesn't do any memory reclamation,
i.e. the Epsilon GC.
Once the Quarkus application is running with Epsilon GC,
apply some load and within a short space of time it will run out of memory and produce a heap dump.

Let’s do this using a Quarkus application that simply responds to an HTTP endpoint request as a starting point.
The sample application can be downloaded from
https://code.quarkus.io[code.quarkus.io] using a browser

> or you via the command line:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or via the command line:
```

2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Installed features: [cdi, rest, smallrye-context-propagation, vertx]
----

Next, apply some load to the HTTP endpoint exposed by the Quarkus application, for example using `curl` in a bash loop:

[source,bash]
----
$ while true; do curl http://localhost:8080/hello; done
----

Switching to the Quarkus console,
an `OutOfMemoryError` would be observed along with some messages indicating that a heap dump is being produced:

[source,bash]
----
2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) getting-started-reactive 1.0.0-SNAPSHOT native (powered by Quarkus 3.9.3) started in 0.030s. Listening on: http://0.0.0.0:8080
2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Profile prod activated.
2024-04-12 09:58:00,855 INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) Installed features: [cdi, rest, smallrye-context-propagation, vertx]
Dumping heap to svm-heapdump-2213-OOME.hprof ...
Heap dump file created [98454651 bytes in 0.733 secs]
Terminating due to java.lang.OutOfMemoryError: Garbage-collected heap size exceeded.
----

Multiple graphical tools exist out there to inspect heap dumps,
such as https://visualvm.github.io/[VisualVM],

> https://eclipse.dev/mat/[Eclipse Memory Analyzer (MAT)]...etc,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
https://eclipse.dev/mat/[Eclipse Memory Analyzer (MAT)], etc.,
```
